## Data Modeling with Postgres

### Project Description (Background)

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They require a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. So my role here is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis.

### Steps taken

This project starts off with 2 datasets, a song dataset and a log dataset.

The song dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song.

The log dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based.

The data was modeled using the star schema. It was extracted from several song and log data sources,then transformed and loaded into a Postgres Database.

Breakdown:
- log_Data and song_data were extracted using the Pandas API.
- log_data was transformed into Users and Time dimension tables involving multiple time based transformations.
- song_Data was transformed into Artists and Songs dimension tables.
- Following this, a fact table (song_plays) was created from the 4 dimension tables mentioned above.

### Description of project files

> test.ipynb displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.

> create_tables.py drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.

> etl.ipynb reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.

> etl.py reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.

> sql_queries.py contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.

### How to run the code
- Ensure ipython-sql and Psycopg2-binary are installed on your machine (environment)
- Run the create_tables.py file to create the tables
- Run the etl.py file to extract, transform and load the data into the tables
- Run the test.ipynb file to test sql queries
- Also, to interactively test the etl pipeline run the etl.ipynb jupyter notebook